Document validation & rate-limit errors (#7145)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/operations/request-validation-rate-limits.md

---
title: Request Validation & Rate-Limit Errors
weight: 30
---

# Request Validation & Rate-Limit Errors

Loki will reject requests if they exceed a usage threshold (rate-limit error) or if they are invalid (validation error).

All occurrences of these errors can be observed using the `loki_discarded_samples_total` and `loki_discarded_bytes_total` metrics. The sections below describe the various possible reasons specified in the `reason` label of these metrics.

It is recommended that Loki operators set up alerts or dashboards with these metrics to detect when rate-limits or validation errors occur. 

### Terminology

- **sample**: a log line

> - **series**/**stream**: samples with a unique combination of labels

Reviewer: Fair. I guess it just drives me berserk that we have "stream/series" because as a user I ask myself "why two terms for the same thing?"

I think its not a big deal in the grand scheme of things. Would you be up to just say 'stream'? Then lower down where we have limits that reference 'series' we just say that its a legacy term that means the same thing?

> - **series**/**stream**: samples with a unique combination of labels

Author: Sold! :smiling_face_with_tear: thanks Jen

- **active stream**: streams that are present in the ingesters - these have recently received log lines within the `chunk_idle_period` period (default: 30m)

## Rate-Limit Errors

Rate-limits are enforced when Loki cannot handle more requests from a tenant.

### `rate_limited`

> This rate-limit is enforced when a tenant has exceeded their configured log ingestion rate-limit.

Author: It would fire for either the baseline rate-limit or the burst.

> Is there a way to differentiate between the two?

I don't believe so. The implementation is handled in https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/time/rate#Limiter.AllowN, and it doesn't specify if the burst or baseline is violated AFAICS from a quick scan.

> This rate-limit is enforced when a tenant has exceeded their configured log ingestion rate-limit.

Reviewer: Understood. Funny enough I see @owen-d elsewhere is suggesting we get rid of the 'burst' limit. 
I guess let's just leave as is for now and its sorta up to the user to have to figure out which limit to raise (or if they raise both). 
In practice, what do we do when a customer hits this limit? Do we raise both? or just the `ingestion_rate_mb`? Does the burst size limit increase for example as I go from medium to large user?

> This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. The config options to use are `ingestion_rate_mb` and `ingestion_burst_size_mb`.

Author: I dig it! I removed `reason=` to fit the pattern of the rest of the doc.

| Property                | Value                   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`           |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected        |
| Retryable               | Yes                     |
| Sample discarded        | No                      |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes                     |
| HTTP status code        | `429 Too Many Requests` |

> 

Author: Here is the message:

```
Ingestion rate limit exceeded for user %s (limit: %d bytes/sec) while attempting to ingest '%d' lines totaling '%d' bytes, reduce log volume or contact your Loki administrator to see if the limit can be increased
```

So yes, it'll specify the user

### `per_stream_rate_limit`

> This limit is enforced a single stream reaches its rate-limit.

Author: There is no HTTP response detailing this problem specifically; the request proceeds as normal - but the `loki_discarded_samples_total` metric will show the tenant that experienced the error.

Each stream has a rate-limit applied to it to prevent individual streams from overwhelming a set of ingesters (equal to the `replication_factor` value).

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. The config options to adjust are `per_stream_rate_limit` and `per_stream_rate_limit_burst`.

In Grafana Cloud, we typically set `per_stream_rate_limit` no higher than 5MB, and `per_stream_rate_limit_burst` no higher than 20MB.

| Property                | Value                   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Enforced by             | `ingester`              |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected        |
| Retryable               | Yes                     |
| Sample discarded        | No                      |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes                     |
| HTTP status code        | `429 Too Many Requests` |

### `stream_limit`

> This limit is enforced when a tenant reaches their maximum number of active streams.

Author: Here is the message in the response:

```
Maximum active stream limit exceeded, reduce the number of active streams (reduce labels or reduce label values), or contact your Loki administrator to see if the limit can be increased
```

So no, it doesn't appear as though it does. Certainly worth adding.

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file.  To increase the allowable active streams, adjust `max_global_streams_per_user`. Alternatively, the number of active streams can be reduced by removing extraneous labels or removing excessive unique label values.

| Property                | Value                   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Enforced by             | `ingester`              |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected        |
| Retryable               | Yes                     |
| Sample discarded        | No                      |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes                     |
| HTTP status code        | `429 Too Many Requests` |

## Validation Errors

Validation errors occur when a request violates a validation rule defined by Loki.

### `line_too_long`

> This error occurs when a log line exceeds the maximum allowable length in bytes.

Author: Good catch, thanks!

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. To increase the maximum line size, adjust `max_line_size`.  Alternatively, logs can be truncated if they exceed the maximum length in bytes with `max_line_size_truncate`.

| Property                | Value            |
|-------------------------|------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`    |
| Retryable               | **No**           |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**          |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes              |

### `invalid_labels`

> This error occurs when one or more labels in the submitted streams fail validation.

Author: There is no HTTP response in this case; the logs will be dropped and the request will continue as normal.
We should certainly improve our messaging here to specify which labels were invalid.

Loki uses the [same validation rules as Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/#metric-names-and-labels) for validating labels.

> Label names may contain ASCII letters, numbers, as well as underscores. They must match the regex `[a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_]*`. Label names beginning with __ are reserved for internal use.

| Property                | Value         |
|-------------------------|---------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor` |
| Retryable               | **No**        |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**       |
| Configurable per tenant | No            |

## `missing_labels`

> This validation error is returned when a stream is submitted without any labels.

Author: It doesn't, no.
Yeah it's a tricky one; I think this is a case where we should just log the line so operators can find it - and for Cloud we can expose them via insight logs?

| Property                | Value         |
|-------------------------|---------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor` |
| Retryable               | **No**        |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**       |
| Configurable per tenant | No            |

## `too_far_behind` and `out_of_order`

> The `too_far_behind` and `out_of_order` reasons are identical, except that `out_of_order` can only occur if the `unordered_writes` config option is set to `false`. The default value since Loki v2.4 is `true`, so `too_far_behind` is more common.

Author: > is it unordered_writes=false then I only see out_of_order
and unordered_writes=true then I only see too_far_behind?

Yes, that's my understanding from looking at the code:

```go
	if outOfOrderSamples > 0 {
		name := validation.OutOfOrder
		if s.unorderedWrites {
			name = validation.TooFarBehind
		}
                ...
```

> This validation error is returned when a stream is submitted out of order. More details can be found [here](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#accept-out-of-order-writes) about Loki's ordering constraints.

Reviewer: does the http response indicate which stream has the ooo samples?

Author: We don't kill the HTTP request on this error, so there's no response containing the streams.

The `unordered_writes` config value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file, whereas `max_chunk_age` is a global configuration.

This problem can be solved by ensuring that log delivery is configured correctly, or by increasing the `max_chunk_age` value.

> It is recommended to resist configuring the `max_chunk_age` option as this has other implications, and to instead try track down the cause for delayed logged delivery. It should also be noted that this a per-stream error, so by simply splitting streams (adding more labels) this problem can be circumvented, especially if multiple hosts are sending samples for a single stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to resist modifying the default value of `max_chunk_age` as this has other implications, and to instead try track down the cause for delayed logged delivery. It should also be noted that this a per-stream error, so by simply splitting streams (adding more labels) this problem can be circumvented, especially if multiple hosts are sending samples for a single stream.
```

| Property                | Value      |
|-------------------------|------------|
| Enforced by             | `ingester` |
| Retryable               | **No**     |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**    |
| Configurable per tenant | No         |

## `greater_than_max_sample_age`

> If the `reject_old_samples` config option is set to `true` (it is by default), then samples will be rejected if they are older than the `reject_old_samples_max_age` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `reject_old_samples` config option is set to `true` (it is by default), then samples will be rejected with `reason=greater_than_max_sample_age` if they are older than the `reject_old_samples_max_age` value. You should not see samples rejected for `reason=greater_than_max_sample_age` if `reject_old_samples=false`.
```

Reviewer: is this right?

Author: I believe so, good call.

| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `too_far_in_future`

If a sample's timestamp is greater than the current timestamp, Loki allows for a certain grace period during which samples will be accepted. If the grace period is exceeded, the error will occur.

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `creation_grace_period` value, or investigating why this particular stream has a timestamp too far into the future. The stream in question will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `max_label_names_per_series`

> If a series is submitted with more labels than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a sample is submitted with more labels than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected with `reason=max_label_names_per_series`.
```

> This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_names_per_series` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_names_per_series` value. The stream to which the offending sample (i.e. the one with too many label names) belongs will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.
```

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `label_name_too_long`

> If a series has a label name with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a sample is sent with a label name that has a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected with `reason= label_name_too_long`. 
```

> This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_name_length` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

Reviewer: in the future would be nice to return not only the stream but also make clear which is the specific label name in that stream that's the source of the problem.

Reviewer: do we have suggestions for users on how high they should go with this? like don't set `max_label_name_length` above x?

Author: > in the future would be nice to return not only the stream but also make clear which is the specific label name in that stream that's the source of the problem.

Agreed.

> do we have suggestions for users on how high they should go with this? like don't set max_label_name_length above x?

I'm not aware of any specific limit, but it's `1024` by default so I'd say that's already excessively high.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `label_value_too_long`

> If a series has a label value with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a sample has a label value with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected for `reason=label_value_too_long`. 
```

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_value_length` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `duplicate_label_names`

> If a series has two or more identical labels, this error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a sample is sent with two or more identical labels, it will be rejected for `reason=duplicate_label_names`. 
```

> The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

Reviewer: also for future would be nice to point out the duplicated label.

---
title: Request Validation & Rate-Limit Errors
weight: 30
---

# Request Validation & Rate-Limit Errors

Loki will reject requests if they exceed a usage threshold (rate-limit error) or if they are invalid (validation error).

> All occurrences of these errors can be observed using the `loki_discarded_samples_total` and `loki discarded_bytes_total` metrics. The sections below describe the various possible reasons specified in the `reason` label of these metrics.

Author: My editor decided to take some liberties, it seems :upside_down_face: thanks

It is recommended that Loki operators set up alerts or dashboards with these metrics to detect when rate-limits or validation errors occur. 

If you are using Grafana Cloud, these can be observed in your Grafana instance in the _Grafana Cloud Billing/Usage_ dashboard under the _Discarded Log Samples_ panel.

### Terminology

- **sample**: a log line
- **series**/**stream**: samples with a unique combination of labels

> - **active stream**: streams that have received log lines within the last `max_chunk_age` period (default: 2h)

Author: The default is 30m for `chunk_idle_period`, but I'll add the other changes - thanks for the clarification :+1:

## Rate-Limit Errors

Rate-limits are enforced when Loki cannot handle more requests from a tenant.

### `rate_limited`

This rate-limit is enforced when a tenant has exceeded their configured log ingestion rate-limit.

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. The config options to use are `ingestion_rate_mb` and `ingestion_burst_size_mb`.

| Property                | Value                   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`           |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected        |
| Retryable               | Yes                     |
| Sample discarded        | No                      |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes                     |
| HTTP status code        | `429 Too Many Requests` |

### `per_stream_rate_limit`

> This limit is enforced a stream reaches its rate-limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This limit is enforced a single stream reaches its rate-limit.
```

nit: thought this emphasized the difference from the prior limit

| Property                | Value         |
|-------------------------|---------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor` |
| Retryable               | **No**        |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**       |
| Configurable per tenant | No            |

## `missing_labels`

This validation error is returned when a stream is submitted without any labels.

| Property                | Value         |
|-------------------------|---------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor` |
| Retryable               | **No**        |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**       |
| Configurable per tenant | No            |

## `too_far_behind` and `out_of_order`

The `too_far_behind` and `out_of_order` reasons are identical, except that `out_of_order` can only occur if the `unordered_writes` config option is set to `false`. The default value since Loki v2.4 is `true`, so `too_far_behind` is more common.

This validation error is returned when a stream is submitted out of order. More details can be found [here](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#accept-out-of-order-writes) about Loki's ordering constraints.

> This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file.
```

Author: Is `max_chunk_age` configurable on a per-tenant basis?
Seems like we only ever reference the global value.

| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `max_label_names_per_series`

If a series is submitted with more labels than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_names_per_series` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `label_name_too_long`

> If a series has a label with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a series has a label name with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.
```

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_name_length` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `label_value_too_long`

> If a series has a label with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a series has a label value with a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, this error will occur.
```

| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `too_far_in_future`

If a sample's timestamp is greater than the current timestamp, Loki allows for a certain grace period during which samples will be accepted. If the grace period is exceeded, the error will occur.

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `creation_grace_period` value, or investigating why this particular stream has a timestamp too far into the future. The stream in question will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `max_label_names_per_series`

> If a sample is submitted with more labels than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected with the `max_label_names_per_series` reason.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a sample is submitted with more labels than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected with the `max_label_names_per_series` reason. Note that 'series' is the same thing as a 'stream' in Loki - the 'series' term is a legacy name. 
```

This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_names_per_series` value. The stream to which the offending sample (i.e. the one with too many label names) belongs will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

| Property                | Value             |
|-------------------------|-------------------|
| Enforced by             | `distributor`     |
| Outcome                 | Request rejected  |
| Retryable               | **No**            |
| Sample discarded        | **Yes**           |
| Configurable per tenant | Yes               |
| HTTP status code        | `400 Bad Request` |

## `label_name_too_long`

If a sample is sent with a label name that has a length in bytes greater than Loki has been configured to allow, it will be rejected with the `label_name_too_long` reason. 

> This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_name_length` value. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This value can be modified globally in the [`limits_config`](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#limits_config) block, or on a per-tenant basis in the [runtime overrides](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/configuration/#runtime-configuration-file) file. This error can be solved by increasing the `max_label_name_length` value, though we do not recommend raising it significantly above the default value of `1024` for performance reasons. The offending stream will be returned in the body of the HTTP response.
```
